NLP Deliverable 2 Guide

1

Introduction

The objective of this project is to apply machine learning techniques to a Named Entity
Recognition (NER) task. Algorithms to solve NER tasks are very useful in many contexts,
from information retrieval to question answering systems.
When solving our NER task, we will confront two different machine learning approaches:
the classic machine learning approach based on handcrafted features and modern machine
learning, where the features are automatically extracted from the training data by the learning
algorithm.

2

Deliverable zip file

This project has to be submitted by a single member of each group using a specific task
created in the webpage of the course. The project needs to be in a zip file containing all
the code to reproduce the results. The zip file containing all the work needs to have the
following form:
• name1 name2 name3.zip. Where name1,name2,... are the names of the members of
each group. Please write your full name. Example: If your name is “John Doe” write
JohnDoe.
• Groups can be up to 4 people. The project documentation should contain a section
briefly describing how the work has been distributed between the group members.

3

Basic rules of the deliverable
• The zip file needs a main.pdf file with a description of your work.
• The zip needs a notebook reproduce results.ipynb that loads the work and evaluates it.
– Accuracy on the train set and test set but taking into account only those predictions where the ground truth is not “O”.
– Confusion matrix on the train and test set.
– F-score
(see
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.metrics.f1_score.html).
– The predictions for the TINY TEST (look below) and the accuracy in such
dataset.
• The data used for this project is train data ner.csv, test data ner.csv containing
training data and test data respectively.

1

• Since the project may be too heavy, it should be sent by email to daniel.ortiz@ub.
edu by a single member of each group. In the email, you may provide a link to dropbox
or similar.
• In addition to this, the document main.pdf should be submitted also by a single group
member to the corresponding task in the virtual campus.
• The deadline for the project will be the 20 of june at 11:59 pm.
• The zip file does not need to include the training data (but you can include it if you
want).
Each requirement from this document that is not satisfied in your work will imply a
reduction on your final mark.

4

Project structure

Your project must be in a folder with the following tree structure:
> name1_name2_name3
> main.pdf
> data
> train_data_ner.csv
> test_data_ner.csv
> tiny_test.csv
> train_models.ipynb
> reproduce_results.ipynb
> fitted_models
> model1
> model2
...
> utils
> utils.py
> environment.yml
Some details:
• main.pdf is a document containing a general description of your work and your results.
More details about this can be found in Section 4.1.
• train models.ipynb is a notebook containing all the code required to train the models
and store them in fitted models
• reproduce results.ipynb is a notebook that must: load the data, load the fitted models from disk and evaluate the models, following the rules for the deliverable described
in this document.
• fitted models is a folder where you will save your trained models. Any model used
in reproduce results.ipynb should be imported from fitted models.
• utils is a folder containing functions that might be used in the train models.ipynb
and/or reproduce results.ipynb. The goal is to keep the notebooks clean (avoid
writing large functions inside the notebook, if you do it you can take them out, write
them in utils.py, import them and use them).
2

• enviroment.yml: environment file to ensure that your code is runable in another machine. The same kind of file that was requested for the first deliverable. It can be
created by activating the desired environment and then executing
conda activate environment
conda env export > environment.yml
4.1

Content of main.pdf file

The main.pdf file should contain a description of the carried out work, including the results
obtained. The document content should be defined so that it can be read independently from
the rest of the submitted files.
The file should have the following structure:
1. Document front page with title and names of team members.
2. Table of contents.
3. Introduction (problem to be solved, general description of the data and main techniques
that were applied, etc.).
4. Exploratory data analysis (description of the data statistics that are considered relevant).
5. Methodology (brief description of the techniques applied to solve the task).
6. Experimental setup (training configuration for the different models, evaluation metrics,
etc.).
7. Results.
8. Conclusions.
9. Team member contributions.
10. Use of AI.
4.2

What models to test

You need to test:
• The CRF model explained during the course. You can think about adding or modifiying
feature templates to improve results. Additionally, you can also try the structured
perceptron model. In this case, you can use the code provided in the corresponding
course notebook.
• At least one deep learning model.

3

4.3

TINY TEST

Notebook reproduce results.ipynb should print the predicted tags for the following TINY TEST
in the format
w1/t1 w2/t2 w3/t3 w4/t4
where wi is a word and ti the tag associated to wi.
# TINY_TEST (these sentences and the ground truth labels are given in the
#
tiny_test.csv file)
The programmers from Barcelona might write a sentence without a spell
checker.
The programmers from Barchelona cannot write a sentence without a spell
checker.
Jack London went to Parris.
Jack London went to Paris.
Bill gates and Steve jobs never thought Microsoft would become such a big
company.
Bill Gates and Steve Jobs never thought Microsof would become such a big
company.
The president of U.S.A thought they could win the war.
The president of the United States of America thought they could win the war
.
The king of Saudi Arabia wanted total control.
Robin does not want to go to Saudi Arabia.
Apple is a great company.
I really love apples and oranges.
Alice and Henry went to the Microsoft store to buy a new computer during
their trip to New York.

4

